Hello everyone, thanks for having me here. Welcome to my talk on making Shiny app deployments
a little bit easier. So, imagine you're a passionate data scientist. You've got this
great idea for a Shiny app, and you're like, right, okay, let's go ahead and make it. So,
you spend a bunch of time creating your app on your development machine, and you might
spend some days, weeks, maybe even months in some cases, and you're really looking
forward to the end result. And that's a valuable Shiny app. Something that's super useful.
Something that could be maybe used in a business context. Yeah, so you have your valuable app,
and it runs super smoothly on your machine locally, and it's a testament to, God, that's
an awful picture, all the hard work that you've put in. So now comes the moment when
you want to gift your creation to a wider audience, and that means thinking about deployment.
So if you're using posit connect, it has a nice easy workflow for deploying and managing
apps. It has a great user interface. It has this smooth one-click deploy functionality.
The thing is that someone has to maintain this platform. If you don't want to maintain
a platform, then Shinyapps.io has a very similar workflow. It's maintained by posit. You don't
have to worry about keeping the underlying system updated, but maybe your project has
restrictions on data residency. If you're a developer, and you don't care about any
of this stuff, you might be in a company where you give your code to another team, and they
might look after the deployment, and they might come up with some solution using the
open source Shiny server or Shiny proxy. There are a whole bunch of ways to deploy a Shiny
app. That's just a couple of them. Whatever deployment method you've gone with, on the
journey making this app, there's been a bunch of hurdles that you've had to jump over, and
I guess the final hurdle of that is deployment. So it would be a real shame if the app fails
to deploy, because it would be like falling at the final hurdle.
So what can we do to help avoid this? Well, who's we in this question? So I like to think
that there's two personas involved in the deployment process. Now, these could be separate
people, it could be two separate teams, or it could be the same person that does both
sides and sees the whole deployment process from start to end. So I like to think that
the first persona is a developer, so someone who writes code to create applications, they're
responsible for the design, testing, debugging, they work on functionality, user interface
and features. And the other persona in the process is IT operations. So these are people
who are responsible for setting up, deploying and maintaining applications on servers. Now,
yeah, they make sure it's properly configured, hosted and available for the users. So it
could be possible that this persona looks after more than just Shiny apps, and they
could be maintaining a platform that Shiny apps are deployed to, such as Posit Connect.
So a little bit about me, I'm someone who fits into this IT operations persona, I'm
not much of a Shiny developer, as you can probably tell, I don't develop Shiny day to
day, but I know enough to make silly cat apps. So yeah, I'm in this IT operations persona
because of my role in this company, and that's Jumping Rivers. So I've been with them just
about two years, we offer all sorts of services related to the data science fields, we offer
training in a variety of topics, so primarily for R and Python, but things like Stan, Git,
Scala and more. So out of these topics, like what I specifically do, are probably these
three things. So in particular, it's managed Posit services and infrastructure. So that's
the service where we aim to take the pain out of creating, managing and maintaining
cloud infrastructure and data science tools. And that means that data scientists can get
on with the problems that matter most to them. So yeah, I provide support to customers
who use those platforms, primarily through email and sometimes video calls. So in this
IT ops persona, Support & Connect, I sometimes get queries from clients asking like, hey,
can you help me figure out why this app doesn't work? It works on my machine. So yeah, this
talk is aimed to briefly skirt over some of the more common root causes that I've seen
in my role. So how do you know when a car is having problems? If you turn the ignition
and it doesn't start, that's probably a pretty good indicator. You might also see some warning
lights on your dashboard, that's usually a sign that something is wrong. If you have
a bit of know‑how, there are a bunch of things you can check yourself under the hood
of a car. Similarly, with shiny app failures, deployment logs give us a peek under the hood
of our deployment, which might reveal some information about why it's not working. So
you can find deployment logs in different places for each method of deployment. It's
like the first port call when you're troubleshooting your apps. So for RStudio Connect, the deployment
logs are nice and easy to find, it's in the top right corner. There's this handy logs
tab on shinyapps.io, and sometimes you need access to the server and the logs will be
located in something like the VAR log directory if you haven't changed the configuration.
So just like looking under the hood of a car for the first time, looking at logs might
be a little intimidating at first. They contain a lot of text, but there's often like telltale
signs and if you know the sort of things to look out for, like connection errors or resource
bottlenecks or missing libraries, they can all be easy to spot log messages.
So what are some common pitfalls that I've seen? Well, a common pitfall that I've often
seen stems from hard-coded secrets. So they're not great from a security perspective, especially
if you're putting code into something like a Git repository. If you imagine something
like a database password being put into source codes, then you need to remember to remove
the secrets and then add them back in. It could be an extra step that's sometimes forgotten.
So this is an example database connection with some credentials that might be used for
developing locally, and this might be what's required when you actually deploy. So unless
you change the codes between each environment, you're going to get database connection issues.
While this is bad from a security perspective and involves some extra effort, it doesn't
necessarily cause deployments to fail, it's just, yeah, when you forget to change them
between the two. So I'm going to go into some niche European
driving laws. So in the UK we drive on the left-hand side, and this is how our car headlights
are configured. So basically the right-hand side headlight is dipped so that you don't
blind everyone in the oncoming lane. Now the rest of Europe drives on the right. I don't
know why these pictures are oriented this way. I wish they were just the same way. Slightly
annoying, but that's where we are. As you might expect, the lights are the opposite
way around in the rest of Europe. So driving a UK car in, say, France without adjusting
your headlights is illegal, because you would be blinding everyone. Some fancier cars have
the functionality to switch the configuration at the press of a switch, and some other cars
didn't have that functionality, and that meant they couldn't easily adapt when you, say,
went to France or something like that. So hard-coded variables kind of limit the configurability
at deployment time. To get this sort of European, UK car headlight switching capability, you
can do this with your code. Replace your variables with calls to environment variables. Now,
this code could be committed to a Git repository and you won't be showing any sensitive values,
and yeah, you'd have to change the code between your dev and broad environment. So you might
be thinking, where do you actually set the values if not in the code? Well, here's PositConnect.
It's a little bit small, but the section I want to point out is on the right‑hand side,
and this is this Vars tab, and this is the section for setting environment variables,
and here at the bottom, we already have our environment variables already set. We've got
the names of the environment variables that were in the code. When I click edit, I can
only set a new variable. It doesn't show the old value. The variables are stored securely
from other users of the platform. So this in particular is good for things like personal
API keys and the like. Now, with ShinyApps.io and ShinyServer, it's
not quite as swish. You need to have this .R environment file in your app directory
to set the environment variables. So environment variables, like this point on environment
variables, kind of leads me nicely into my next point, which is more the recourse to
this actual problem, which is the availability of external resources. So just as cars need
fuel to run, your app probably relies on external data. So your app might rely on APIs that
allow external systems to communicate and interact with your Shiny app. You might pull
data from a database to populate some nice visualizations. Similarly, you might pull
resources from some sort of remote file or something like that. If these resources aren't
available, then it's kind of like your app's fuel source isn't available. So some common
causes for this are things like incorrect credentials, which I've just covered. It could
also be things like connectivity and things like firewall rules. For example, with ShinyApps.io,
in order to access a database that's behind something like a company firewall, you need
to whitelist some ShinyApps.io addresses in the firewall, and you need to ask a sysadmin
or someone who is in charge of that. Another thing I've come across is permissions
of the user in the database. So you want to ensure that your database user that's specified
in the Shiny application has the necessary permissions to perform the operations. These
might be read-only, and if you try and do a write operation in your Shiny app, then
obviously that's not going to work. The next reason apps fail to deploy is probably the
most common, and it's issues with dependencies. So libraries, packages, and files that make
up your application. Just as there's a bunch of parts that fit together to make up a car,
it's crucial to ensure that you have a clear understanding of the dependencies that your
app requires, and that they're included in the deployment process. So maintaining this
slight detail car parts list, it's kind of like what it's like, and if something's missing
and someone wants to build a car from that car parts list, and something's missing, then
the car's probably not going to work. The RxConnect package and write manifest function
can be pretty helpful with maintaining things like this, so it's great for R package dependencies
and files, but it doesn't help when they rely on things like underlying system dependencies.
So many R packages contain code written in C or C++ for performance reasons, so if you
use these, you need to have the development tools installed on your deployment environment.
Certain packages might need system utilities, such as wget, curl, or git to download data
and interact with external resources. If you plan on using R packages for generating PDF
documents, you need to have like a tech distribution installed.
Quarto seems to be all the rage at the moment. I'd love to know how to use it, but my role
doesn't really stretch much more than installing it. So yeah, I think I've drilled home that
there's this obvious point that if something, a dependency is missing, that's the reason
the app doesn't work.
So another critical consideration is the resourcing on the environment in which your app's deployed.
So just as a Formula 1 car needs a suitable engine to perform well, your Shiny app needs
appropriate computing power and memory to operate effectively. So obviously a lack of
appropriate resources would lead to a sluggish performance. It's kind of like imagine this
car had a small engine, it wouldn't perform as well in a race.
So system resources. Just how you can tune a car's engine to run optimally. As a developer,
you can tune your app's code to use fewer operations, like CPU cycles and memory. I
think Joe covered that pretty well in the previous talk.
Sometimes there's platform configuration settings related to memory. So there's this max app
image size config setting in the connect settings. So if your app uses large assets like images
and data files and dependencies, and it exceeds this total size, then obviously it's not going
to work.
So collaborating with IT operations to ensure that your app's deployment environment has
the appropriate resources and it's configured correctly is vital for having a successful
deployment.
So I'm going to quickly touch on some proactive approaches you can take. I don't have the
time to really go into them in any depth. So one effective approach is continuous integration
and continuous deployment. So that involves automating the process of deployment. So any
time you make any code changes, it will, you know, as with any automation, will save time.
You don't have to redeploy it every time you make a code change. So yeah, this will
help save time.
Another strategy is containerization, and that involves packaging your app and its dependencies
into isolated environments known as containers. This approach ensures consistent behavior
across different environments from, like, development to production. So, like, you can
encapsulate, like, your environment variables and things like that all into the Docker container.
Well, I haven't even mentioned Docker yet, but that's a tool that you can use for containerization.
Yeah. Moreover, monitoring and alerting systems play a pivotal role in catching issues before
they escalate. So, yeah, just as modern cars come equipped with sensors that, you know,
come up with lights on your dashboard, monitoring tools can notify you of things like performance
anomalies or resource usage spikes and errors. And, you know, alerts can help you take action
if, like, it reaches a certain threshold or something like that.
Yeah, so just to recap some of the things I've covered in this talk, if you can take
away at least one thing that I've mentioned that you haven't heard of before and you can
do some Googling around it, then I guess I'd be really happy. Yeah, and you can look
out for it in your next Shiny app deployment. So, yeah, as I said, like, logs will give
good clues and nowhere to find them is good knowledge to have. I went into hard-coded
secrets, probably a bit more in-depth than the others. But most often the different
types of dependencies, either external or internal, are the main reason why deployments
will fail. So, thanks for listening. If anyone's got any
questions, I've got some contact details on the right-hand side if you wanted to email
me about anything. And we've got some blogs at the link on the bottom. Yeah, thanks for
listening, guys.
We do have time for a couple of questions. And your first question is, do you think there
is anything that the Shiny library and POSIT developers could do differently to make the
deployments easier for IT administrators?
I guess I'm a little, yeah, I feel like a bit of a deer in headlights. Can you repeat
the question, please?
Sure, so the question is that, could the Shiny, the developers that create Shiny, or the POSIT
developers in general, could do something differently, could they help you somehow,
you know, to make the deployments easier?
I guess things like the manifest and like the RSConnect package help make deployments
a lot easier. Yeah, I guess like guidelines to provide to developers and things like that
would be, yeah, beneficial.
Okay, you have a second question, which is, one thing that can be frustrating is differences
between dev and prod environments that do not raise errors in the logs. So, do you have
any tips for diagnosing these, so you don't have any errors, you know, for the dev environments
in the logs, but you do for the production environments?
So well, I guess you have errors in the logs for the prod environment. So I guess, yeah,
looking through the logs, I guess scanning them for keywords and maybe some of the sort
of bullet points that I've mentioned. Google, Google's a good, yeah, Google's a good place
to look.
I guess one strategy is to make the prod system as similar to the dev system, you know, as
possible, then you would catch these things earlier.
Yeah, yeah, that's a pretty obvious one, yeah, I guess, I should have said.
So let's thank all the speakers of this session.